Initial draft of excluder blog post (#366)
ropensci/roweb3: content/blog/2022-08-09-working-with-qualtrics-data-excluding/index.Rmd

---
title: 'Working with Qualtrics Data--Part 2: Excluding Data'
author:
  - Jeffrey R. Stevens
date: '2022-08-09'
slug: working-with-qualtrics-data-excluding
categories: []
tags:
  - community
  - data munging
  - excluder
  - packages
  - Software Peer Review
  - survey data
package_version: 0.4.0
description: "This post summarizes how to use the excluder package to exclude survey data."
tweet: "Exclude problematic survey data with the excluder R package by @JeffStevensADML!"

> output: hugodown::md_document

Reviewer: Consider adding the hex sticker for excluder as the twitterImg. Just update the `name-of-image.png` and alt text and add that file to the post folder. 
```suggestion
twitterImg: blog/2022/08/09/working-with-qualtrics-data-excluding/name-of-image.png
twitterAlt: "Alternative description of the image"
output: hugodown::md_document
```

Qualtrics tracks how much of the survey the respondent completes. 
By default, excluder detects less than 100% completion, but any level of completion percentage can be set to detect.
* **Survey completion time** (`duration`): 
Qualtrics records the number of seconds that the respondent works on the survey. 
excluder can detect completion times that are too fast or that take too long.
* **IP address country** (`ip`)<sup>*</sup>: 
If the data are non-anonymous, IP addresses are available, which can determine the country of origin for the respondent. 
excluder can detect IP addresses outside of a specified country. 
Note, however, that VPNs can use IP addresses outside of the country of origin, so you must weigh the possibility of false alarms in detecting IP addresses in other countries.
* **Geolocation in US** (`location`)<sup>*</sup>: 
Qualtrics determines geolocation (latitude and longitude) through GPS or IP addresses. 
excluder can detect if location originates from outside of the United States but cannot detect this for other countries at the moment.
* **Duplicate IP address** (`duplicates`)<sup>*</sup>: 
Automated bots may spam your survey from the same IP address. 

> excluder detect if the same IP address shows up repeatedly in your data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
excluder detects if the same IP address shows up repeatedly in your data. 
```

```{r}
mark_preview(qualtrics_text) %>% 
  head()
```

There are two important outputs. 
First, we have an informational message telling us that _2 rows were collected as previews_. 
Each mark function will output this kind of message letting us know how many rows meet each metadata criterion.
Second, we now have a new column called `exclusion_preview` appended to the data frame.
Notice that the first two rows of that column have `preview` values while the rest of the rows are blank.
We have now marked which rows meet this metadata criterion.

Of course, you may want to mark your data for multiple metadata criteria. 
To do this, you simply have to connect multiple mark functions with a pipe (either [base R's `|>`](https://rdrr.io/r/base/pipeOp.html) or [magrittr's %>%](https://magrittr.tidyverse.org/reference/pipe.html)). 
So if we want to mark preview data and all rows where the completion duration is less than 200 seconds or more than 600 seconds, we just chain these together. 
In fact, we can also pull the data frame out of functions as well. 

> Note that I'm going to show just a subset of columns and rows for clarity (ignore from `dplyr::select()` on).

Reviewer: This is something I struggle with when teaching a lot. I think it's better to explain the function than to suggest ignoring it. Try:
```suggestion
Note that for clarity, I use the [`select()`](https://dplyr.tidyverse.org/reference/select.html) function from [dplyr](https://dplyr.tidyverse.org/reference/select.html) to show just a subset of columns.
```

The exclude functions are like the opposite of the check functions.
Therefore, we can pipe multiple exclude functions together to remove data based on multiple metadata criteria.

```{r}
qualtrics_text %>%
  exclude_preview() %>%
  exclude_progress() %>%
  exclude_duplicates() %>%
  exclude_duration(min_duration = 100) %>%
  exclude_resolution() %>%
  exclude_ip() %>%
  exclude_location() %>%
  head()
```

As we exclude, the messages tell us how many rows are returned from each functions, so we can see how the data frame gets smaller at each step. 
While the order of the functions shouldn't influence the final data frame output, it might make sense to use criteria with many exclusions early to speed processing of subsequent exclusions.

## Deidentifying data

Congratulations---we have now removed all of our problematic data!
However, those data frames may still have identifying information included in them (e.g., IP addresses and geolocation).
Before we pass on the data set to others or post it publicly, we probably want to remove those identifying columns. 

> excluder has a `deidentify()` function that quickly removes either all metadata columns.

Reviewer: In Part 1, you mentioned that qualtRics also has options for deidentifying the data. Is it worth adding a sentence or two here how the two methods are different?

> excluder has a `deidentify()` function that quickly removes either all metadata columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
excluder has a `deidentify()` function that quickly removes all metadata columns.
```

```{r}
deidentify(qualtrics_text) %>%
  head()
```

You can also use the `strict = FALSE` argument to only remove the non-anonymous columns, leaving the computer metadata.

```{r}
deidentify(qualtrics_text, strict = FALSE) %>%
  head()
```

## Conclusion

Before the fun part of analyzing data, we often need to perform some more tedious steps. The [qualtRics](https://docs.ropensci.org/qualtRics/) package is a huge help in automating the import of data into R. 

> As we learned in Part 1 of this post, after connecting to the Qualtrics API, we can quickly (and powerfully) import our Qualtrics data with the `fetch_survey()` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we learned in [Part 1](blog/2022/08/02/working-with-qualtrics-data-importing/), after connecting to the Qualtrics API, we can quickly (and powerfully) import our Qualtrics data with the [`fetch_survey()`](https://docs.ropensci.org/qualtRics/reference/fetch_survey.html) function.
```

Once those data are imported, we can use the [excluder](https://docs.ropensci.org/excluder/) package to deal with potentially problematic online survey data based on respondent metadata using the mark, check, and exclude functions. 
Then we can deidentify our data set before continuing to work with it or passing it on to others.
Combined, these two packages can improve your data workflow by automating import and early cleaning processes, leaving the fun part of data processing up to you!

```{=html}

> {{< figure src = "happy_data.jpg" width = "600" alt = "A woman sitting on a black couch with a laptop is looking left and smiling. Photo by Brooke Cagle on Unsplash." class = "center" >}}

Reviewer: I think the attribution should be visible, try adding it with the `caption = ` tag.

```

If you have ideas for improvements or find bugs, please [submit an issue](https://github.com/ropensci/excluder/issues) on the [excluder GitHub repo](https://github.com/ropensci/excluder/).

## Acknowledgments

In developing the excluder package, I thank [Francine Goh](https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7364-4398) and Billy
Lim for comments on an early version of the package, as well as the

> insightful feedback during [peer review](https://github.com/ropensci/software-review/issues/455) from [rOpenSci](/) editor [Mauro

Reviewer: ```suggestion
insightful feedback during [peer review](https://github.com/ropensci/software-review/issues/455) from rOpenSci editor [Mauro
```

Click _Add a new question_ and select the _Meta info_ question type.

```{=html}
{{< figure src = "qualtrics_metadata.png" width = "600" alt = "A screenshot of adding a Meta info question to a Qualtrics survey." caption = "Source: Jeffrey Stevens" class = "center" >}}
```

## Removing problematic data

Now that we've collected the proper metadata, we can use it to deal with potentially problematic data.

### Metadata

Here are seven types of metadata that excluder works with, along with their tags that are used in excluder functions.

* **Qualtrics preview status** (`preview`): 
Qualtrics records data when you [preview your survey](https://www.qualtrics.com/support/survey-platform/survey-module/preview-survey/) before deploying it. 
You probably always want to remove preview data.
* **Survey progress** (`progress`): 
Qualtrics tracks how much of the survey the respondent completes. 
excluder can detect surveys which are incomplete.
* **Survey completion time** (`duration`): 
Qualtrics records the number of seconds that the respondent works on the survey. 

> excluder can detect completion times that are too fast or that take too long.

Author: I prefer 'that' to 'which' here.
